# PD-MCIx

## Abstract
 When mild cognitive impairment (MCI) occurs in the context of Parkinson’s Disease (PD-MCI), individuals face an elevated risk of further cognitive decline and eventual progression to Parkinson’s Disease Dementia (PD-D). PD-MCI can be subclassified into amnestic and non-amnestic subtypes. Existing methods of PD-MCI diagnosis often rely on manual scoring, idiosyncratic algorithms, or complicated software; these approaches can be time-intensive, error-prone, or inaccessible due to high costs and limited customizability. Currently, no publically-available tool exists to automate the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairments (MCI) in individuals with Parkinson’s Disease (PD) based on objective cognitive, subjective cognitive, and functional impairment utilizing neuropsychological data. Therefore, we created PD-MCIx, an open-source diagnostic tool available for download in R and Python, and available via the Hugging Face platform. 

The tool employs rule-based logic derived from the 2012 MDS Task Force criteria and was validated on 2 datasets: (1) DoD (n = 99) and (2) LONG (n = 181). Both datasets contained baseline scores (e.g., neuropsychological assessments and self report surveys) where the parent studies evaluated those with Parkinson’s Disease. DoD analyzed the relationship between daily exercise with brain activity and cognitive performance, while LONG analyzed novel predictors of cognitive and psychiatric change in PD. Datasets contained clinician-reviewed diagnoses which were used as a benchmark to evaluate diagnostic accuracy of PD-MCIx. Validation using the McNemar's chi-square test with continuity correction indicated a significant difference between the paired proportions, χ²(1, n = 99) = 12.19, p < .002, while the proportion test indicated 81.9% accuracy with clinician-reviewed diagnosis for DoD. For LONG, McNemar's test and proportion test revealed p < .01, and 89.6% accuracy with clinician-reviewed diagnosis based on participant data. Specifically, McNemar's chi-square test with continuity correction indicated a significant difference between the paired proportions, χ²(1, n = 181) = 10.5, p < .01. 

When supplied with a sufficient quantity of data, PD-MCIx is comparable to clinician-reviewed diagnosis, but users should be aware that PD-MCIx exhibits a tendency toward conservative under-diagnoses. PD-MCIx is a curated algorithm researchers can use in lieu of writing their own scripts that produces a classification detailing the presence of MCI, amnestic versus non-Amnestic subtype, and single versus multiple domain subtype.
